Title: What prevents Finnish women from applying to software engineering roles? A preliminary analysis of survey data

Authors : Annika Wolff, Antti Knutas, Paula Savolainen

Conference Name : ICSE-2020 program Software Engineering Education and Training - I14-SEET - Industry Relevant Teaching and Others at Goguryeo

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION:

In order to know about gender equality Finland is considered the most vast country. Whilst statistics support the notion that Finland is performing well compared to many other countries in terms of workplace equality or gender equality , there are still many areas for improvement. A UNESCO science report from 2017 identifies that only 22 % of graduates in engineering from Finnish universities are women In terms of the overall job market, Eurostat statistics from 2018 identify that only 28 percent of scientists and engineers in Finland are women in comparison to men’s, putting it almost in last place compared European countries. if there are gender inequalities in a workplace it is extremely fascinating look at the organization’s to focus on the hiring policies in HR, the working culture and the support that is in place to prevent discrimination or working environments. However, what if women are not even applying to these positions in the first place - even if they would be interested in them - due to their own perceptions and past experiences? What effect might such perceptions and experiences have had on their attitudes and feelings of efficacy, and therefore their confidence to apply for roles? This articles highlights the problems that initially or practically female engineers are facing due to the lack of knowledge and this paper seeks casting towards the women of Finland to enrol themselves in software engineering without any hesitations etc. This paper reports on a survey designed to understand the experiences of 252 respondents who were mainly women who al-ready work in, or are somehow already interested in applying for software engineering roles. Early studies looking for the causes of gender differences in attitudes to computing at school age have shown that at middle school age, boys are more likely to own computers, to use them both in and out of school and to hold gender stereotypical views about computers and girls, they are less interested in the field. Gender stereotype can have a secondary effect, when gender stereotypes influence also the actions of teachers and caregivers. Outcomes include less opportunities to engage in computing clubs at school, and less encouragement from parents towards girls to participate in computing activities. women tended to report lower self efficacy compared to men for occupations not typically associated with women (such as accountant, drafter, engineer, mathematician), even though more objective measures through test scores revealed no difference in ability. older females hold less positive attitudes towards computing than younger ones. These views are also shared by males, some of whom have a tendency to doubt the capabilities of women in IT. many women still enter into technology-related professions and hiring policies, an area often put under the spotlight when diversity issues are considered, have been improving with efforts taken to minimise bias in a selection process. However, when considering issues of retention and progression within a company the picture is less clear. Typically masculine working culture and lack of flexibility towards women’s often differing workplace needs can still be barriers the pipeline does not take into consideration that women’s career paths are far more likely to take a non-traditional and non-linear path than men’s . Therefore, comparing boys with girls, or men with women at different stages of life may be misleading. A more fruitful approach may be to identify the root causes of why women who want to enter the profession - at any stage in life - may feel more, or less, inclined to do so. what prevents certain women from even considering technology related careers. Instead, we look at women who have already expressed an interest in technology related careers and explore the various factors, such as attitude and self-efficacy, to understand what may affect their willingness to put themselves forward for roles. We try to identify when problems arise, but also to identify positive experiences and how they may have influenced career choice. The overall aim is to provide evidence to support initiatives that are trying to reduce inequality in computing fields.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY:

Our research was conducted in cooperation with the Finnish Software and E-business Association. To answer our research questions, the survey was created by adapting existing (validated) scales for measuring attitudinal components and self-efficacy, then by framing a series of both closed and open-ended questions for eliciting information on past experiences and by collecting demographic and other related information. Adaptation of the existing scales was for the purposes of i) tailoring existing attitude rating scales to the computing context ii) harmonizing the Likert scales of different survey instruments to a 7 point scale. This step was considered necessary to improve the user experience and was possible as we were not directly replicating the studies. This resulted in a survey that had four distinct parts. Part 1: attitudes towards women in software programming roles. This part consisted of 12 questions, aimed to measure cognitive, affective and behavioural components of attitude towards computing. Part 2: self-efficacy. This part was designed to measure both general [38] and computing [32] self-efficacy. Part 3: personal experience. This mixture of closed and open-ended questions were designed to discover respondents past or present experience in working in software engineering roles and uncovering past experiences both during school, higher education or working life. Part 4: demographic questions. This section tailored standard demographic questions to a Finnish context. We selected the Partial Least Squares Path Modeling (PLS-PM) statistical modelling method with non-parametric bootstrapping to cope with slight non-normality of the observed variables and low sample size. PLS-PM is an appropriate method to use because of the limited sample size and the path model includes a formatively measured construct. We applied the SmartPLS 3 software package for data analysis. We assessed the validity of our measurement model by assessing the 1) measurement reliability, 2) model structure, and 3) discriminant validity following the guidelines by Hair and Henseler. Furthermore, we assessed nomological validity, according to which the relationships between the constructs in the path model, sufficiently well-known through prior research, should be strong and significant. Because of the hypothesis testing objective of the paper, we further assessed the overall fit of the structural model to the data in order to analyze whether the model was specified correctly.

RESULTS:

The intelligent guess on negative experiences affecting all attitudes and computer self-efficacy were supported. Negative experiences having an effect on affective and mind attitudes was expected, since these attitude questions express negative sentiments. For example, affective questions include a question such as “I feel anxious about using computers and other technologies” and cognitive questions include “it is easier for men to get software programming roles than women in Finland”. What was unexpected that the negative experiences also had a connection to computer self-efficacy and action or behavioural attitudes, which includes a question such as “I intend to learn new software programming skills”. The hypotheses on equal opportunities affecting attitudes were supported only on cognitive attitudes. Equal opportunities reducing cognitive attitudes was expected, since learning opportunities was theorized to be a positive experience that reduces a negative attitude. Equal opportunities also had a positive effect on computer self-efficacy. All attitudes had a statistically significant effect with a small effect size on the respondent currently working in technology industry. Positive attitude (behavioural) had a positive effect and negative attitudes (behavioural and cognitive) had a negative effect. As expected, equal learning opportunities had a positive effect on work through the mediating constructs. Also, it was expected that the negative experiences had a negative effect on working in technology careers through cognitive attitudes. What was unexpected that negative experiences had again a positive effect through computer self-efficacy. Also, the moderate to low explanatory power indicates that future studies should evaluate other exogenous constructs that would explain general self-efficacy and the two attitude types better

CONCLUSION:

There are many reasons why women may find it harder than men to enter technical professionals public professions due to role inequality and harassment’s and stuff that should not be practice in work places or prohibited in any case. In software engineering, prior research has identified a range of issues that begin in early school days and continue into working life. These are set against a backdrop of societal expectations and gender stereotyping. This work has explored these issues from the Finnish perspective. We look at the general view of Finland as a country with good gender equality. However, in reality many professions are heavily gendered, even more so than in countries with less gender equality overall
